Part one.

Eq, Ord, Semigroup (+ contrepart), Monoid, Category, Functor

https://dev.to/gcanti/series/680 - the fp-ts author articles cycle.

This is extremely short conspect:

1. Eq and Ord are for comprasion and sorting. If you have typescript object, you can use contremap function to transform object to some primitive which already has Eq and Ord.

2. Semigroup - it is type with operation that is associative.
   For the easiness such operation is always called concat, though it can be anything.

interface Semigroup<A> {
concat: (x: A, y: A) => A
}

e.g.
type A = {concat: (a: number, b: number) => a - b}
type B = {concat: (a: string, b: string) = `${a} ${b}`}

because concat(concat(a,b), c) = concat(a, concat(b,c))

3. Monoid - it is Semigroup with neutral ('empty) element.

interface Monoid<A> extends Semigroup<A> {
readonly empty: A
}

If saying more detailed:
Monoid - it is type with operation that is associative and that operation has neutral element. Neutral element is an element for
which two things are true:
Right identity: concat(x, empty) = x, for all x in A
Left identity: concat(empty, x) = x, for all x in A

e.g.
for number and + operation empty element is 0:
x + 0 = x for any number
for number and _ operation empty element is 1:
x _ 1 = x for any number

4. Category - a category is a pair (Objects, Morphisms) where:

"Objects is a collection of objects
Morphisms is a collection of morphisms (or arrows) between the objects

In Typescript:
objects are all the TypeScript types: string, number, Array<string>, ...
morphisms are all the TypeScript functions: (a: A) => B, (b: B) => C, ... where A, B, C, ... are TypeScript types
identity morphisms are all encoded as a single polymorphic function const identity = <A>(a: A): A => a
composition of morphisms is the usual function composition (which is associative)" (c)

5. Programs can be pure and 'effectful' (with side effects)

gcanty writes it this way:
f: (a: A) => F<B> is an effectful program
g: (b: B) => C is a pure program

where F<B> is a result that has side effects - may fail, is async, may return undetermine number of results (array or list).

If functions were always pure, programm could be simple composition of functions, e.g g(f()), but because if side effects it's not possible.

6. Composition of functions A and B is calling a function B with result of function A:
   a(b())

7. Functor - is a type that has map function and object.
   export interface Functor<F> {
   readonly URI: F
   readonly map: <A, B>(fa: HKT<F, A>, f: (a: A) => B) => HKT<F, B>
   }

Functor is a thing that helps to compose 'effectful' (with side effect) functions.

gcanty defines 'lift' function that does this mapping. Simply saying, it is map function that helps to treat function with side effect as a simple object.

lift is a curried version of a map:

lift: <A, B>(f: (a: A) => B) => ((fa: F<A>) => F<B>)
map: <A, B>(fa: F<A>, f: (a: A) => B) => F<B>

"Functors are mappings between categories that preserve the categorical structure, i.e. that preserve identity morphisms and composition.

Definition
A functor is a pair (F, lift) where

F is a n-ary type constructor (n >= 1) which maps each type X to the type F<X> (mapping between objects)
lift is a function with the following signature
lift: <A, B>(f: (a: A) => B) => ((fa: F<A>) => F<B>)" (c)
When he speaks about "n-ary type constructors with n >= 1" you can read "typescript generic".

e.g.
a) We've got two functions and want to compose them (call g(f())):
const f = (a: string): string[] => a.split(',')
const g = (b: string): number => b.length

To do this, we need to define function that performs mapping:

function lift<string, number>(g: (b: string) => number): (fb: Array<string>) => Array<number> {
return fb => fb.map(g)
}

and now we can compose them:

const value = 'aa,vv,bb,qq,ee';
const result = lift(g)(f(value)); //[2,2,2,2,2]

b) Same, but side effect is option
const f = (a: string): Option<number> => isNaN(a) ? none : some(Number(a))
const g = (b: number): string => `${b * 100}%`

function lift<number, string>(g: (b: number) => string): (fb: Option<number>) => Option<string> {
return fb => (isNone(fb) ? none : some(g(fb.value)))
}
and composition would be:

const value = '0.239';
const result = lift(g)(f(value)); //"23,9%"

c) Same, but side effect is async (but 100% guarantee it won't fail).

const f = (a: string): Option<number> => isNaN(a) ? none : some(Number(a))
const g = (b: number): string => `${b * 100}%`

const f = async (): number => 1;
const g = (b: number): string => `${b * 100}%`

function lift<number, string>(g: (b: number) => string): (fb: Task<number>) => Task<string> {
return fb => () => fb().then(g)
}

and composition would be:

const result = lift(g)(f()); //"100%"
